---
created: 2026-02-27 18:04
modified: 2026-03-06 09:42
tags:
  - AI
title: Embeddings
aliases:
  - Embeddings
publish: true
folder: AI
---

## Main Concept

**Embeddings** are numerical representations of real-world objects—such as words, images, or audio—stored as a list of numbers called a vector. Instead of treating data as simple text or pixels, embeddings capture the "meaning" or relationships between items by mapping them into a multidimensional space.

## Context

- Computers only understand numbers; however, human language and visual patterns are complex and full of nuances. Embeddings convert complex, unstructured data into a format that machine learning models can process efficiently.
- For instance, embeddings allow LLMs to recognize that the words "king" and "queen" are more closely related than "king" and "apple."

## Key Aspects

- The embedding process works goes after the tokenization, as each token (identified by its Token ID) must be processed through an **embedding model** to be converted into a multidimensional array.
- Vectors possess a high dimensionality to capture a vast array of features from a single token, such as semantic meaning, syntactic role, sentiment, and more.
- By utilizing multidimensional vectors, models can identify similarities between words (or images) through mathematical operations between vectors (such as cosine similarity).
- Embeddings are stored in specialized Vector Databases (such as Amazon OpenSearch or Amazon Aurora with `patternsgvector`), which are optimized for efficient storage and high-speed similarity searches.
- Words that have semantic relationship have similar embeddings, example: dog and putty, or cat and kitten.
- Embeddings allow vector databases to do similarity search. 

## Applications

- Semantic Search
- Recommendation Engines
- Retrieval Augmented Generation
- Anomaly Detection

## Examples

- Take the word "love". Its vector representation captures that it is an emotion, a noun (or verb depending on context), carries a positive valence, and is semantically related to "affection" or "caring."
- Text: The sentence "I love my cat" is converted into a vector like [0.12, -0.54, 0.88...]. A similar sentence like "I adore my kitten" would result in a vector that is mathematically very close to the first on.

---

## Related Concepts:

- [[20260220T0735-retrieval-augmented-generation-rag|Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)]]
- [[20260226T0947-tokenization|Tokenization]]
- [[20260226T0818-vector-databases-in-amazon-bedrock|Vector Databases in Amazon Bedrock]]

---

## Links:

_References_
